# 1. What are Roles ?
In simple terms its just a **directory structure**. Inside the dir structure you have all the resources needed to satisfy a particular automation outcome.

# 2. Why use Roles ?
Ansible roles make it easier to write, share and reuse your own roles. You can obtain fully made roles from many sources like Red Hat automation hub, private automation hub and from the community's Ansible Galaxy website.
> Its always advised to use roles from authors you trust

RHEL includes some roles in the ```rhel-system-roles``` package

# 3. Defining Variables and Defaults
Role variables are defined by creating vars/main.yml or defaults/main.yml
These variables are referenced like any other variable {{ VAR_NAME }} These variables have high precedence and cannot be overriden by inventory varialbe

# 4. Using Ansible Roles in a play
There are several ways to call **roles** in a play:
- You can include or import them like a task in your tasks list.
- You can create a roles list that runs specific roles before your play's tasks

# 5. Including and importing Roles as Tasks
Roles can be add to the play by using an ordinary task.
Use the **ansible.builtin.import_role** module to statically import a role.
Use the **ansible.builtin.include_role** module to dynamically include a role.

# 6. Example with *ansible.builtin.import_role*
**playbook.yml**
```
- name: Run a role as a task
  hosts: servera.lab.example.com
  tasks:
    - name: A normal task
      ansible.builtin.debug:
        msg: 'first task'

    - name: A task to import role1 here
      ansible.builtin.import_role:
        name: role1
      vars:
        vars1: httpd
        vars2: firewalld

```
# 7. Using a Roles Section in a play
The roles section is very similar to tasks section. The only difference is insted of consisting of a list of tasks, its a list of roles.


**playbook.yml**
```
---
- name: A play that only has roles
  hosts: remote.example.com
  roles:
    - role: role1
    - role: role2 
```

**playbook.yml**
```
- name: Roles always run first
  hosts: servera.lab.example.com
  tasks:
    - name: Example Task
      ansible.builtin.debug:
        msg: "This task runs after the role"
  roles:
    - role: role1
```
> [!IMPORTANT]
> It is generally a good practice to avoid both *roles* and *tasks* in a play to avoid confusion about the order in which roles and tasks run.
>
> If you must have a task section and roles, it is better to create tasks that use ***ansible.builtin.import_roles*** to run at the correct points in the play's execution.

# 8. Specal Tasks Sections
There are two special tasks:
- *pre_tasks*
- *post_tasks*
> These are in the same indentation level as the *tasks* and *roles*.

## The priority is as follows
-  pre_tasks run first
-  All the role tasks run second
-  post_tasks run third





